Chloe Thurston: Good morning everyone. We're seeing people are still joining, so maybe I'll wait just a second. Get started.
Chloe Thurston: Okay, so we're going to talk about the media today. And the first thing that I wanted to do, though, as I mentioned last week when I ended our lecture.
Chloe Thurston: The sort of some of the limitations of public opinion and voters sort of aptitude.
Chloe Thurston: Directly feed into what we're going to be talking about today and also the two lectures for next week, so I thought it would actually maybe be useful to start with a brief recap of
Chloe Thurston: The democratic dilemma that we discussed last week and sort of its implications for American democracy. So can anyone
Chloe Thurston: Remember sort of what some of the limitations were that voters face for some of the challenges for democracy that we talked about last week when we talk about public opinion and political behavior we
Lee Ajisafe: Not every voter has equal education to pick their representatives.
Chloe Thurston: Right, so they're big educational disparities and knowledge disparities, which which can affect sort of their ability to evaluate their sort of the vote choices that they have, right, what else, what are some of the other sorts of limitations that we discussed
Chloe Thurston: God
Jiyoon Yang: We discussed measurement challenges. So it's hard to measure public opinion, just because there's so many scientific and technical challenges to pulling
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, so it's also just difficult sometimes to know what the public really
Chloe Thurston: Wants and, you know, there are lots of
Chloe Thurston: Of innovations, I'll say, you know, pollsters recognize many of these challenges. And so, you know, try to innovate around them at the same time still kind of fundamentally difficult to really know what the public wants anything else, any other sort of challenges that individual opinion.
Chloe Thurston: poses for sort of democracy, the quality of democracy or the representativeness of the outcomes that ensue.
Chloe Thurston: So quiet.
Chloe Thurston: Well, how about the information challenge. And this came up a bit with least point. I think
Chloe Thurston: The idea that, you know, it's sort of hard for people to educate themselves, not just about candidates, but also about issues, right. And so the examples that I have here are
Chloe Thurston: two sorts of things that people are expected to participate in the first is a proposition. This is from California. Anyone here from California.
Chloe Thurston: Know it's really quiet morning today. Okay, so good. This is a ballot okay even great
Chloe Thurston: This is a ballot referendum, there are many such ballot referendums in California. I remember living in California, having to think about all of the implications of these different votes.
Chloe Thurston: You know, unlike sort of an elected official who are representative who is supposed to weigh and consider the costs and benefits and different trade offs of
Chloe Thurston: various pieces of legislation. The challenge with the ballot referendum is that that onus is put on citizens who might not necessarily understand
Chloe Thurston: All of the technicalities and might not understand what sort of being traded for each other. And so this is for a high speed passenger train mom. That sounds great.
Chloe Thurston: But at the same time, you don't necessarily know how it. What sort of is being traded off in what it's been created off for the other example I have here is for participatory budgeting and you know it's definitely
Chloe Thurston: A you know good in some ways from a democratic perspective to invite more people to participate in the policy making process. But again, we have this challenge of
Chloe Thurston: A chat window.
Chloe Thurston: Resting Gretchen. Do you want to say something about this since you're from Chicago.
Gretchen Faliszek: I yeah I mean I just remember it was, I have no concept of time. It could have been five years ago. It could have been too. Um, but no. Yeah, I mean, I remember I was in high school, when it happened and I was able to vote because it wasn't like actually
Gretchen Faliszek: A formal voting type of thing. Um, and, yeah, it was really interesting. I forget what one but you basically just ranked like
Gretchen Faliszek: If you wanted like potholes to be taken care of, or like there was like one specific intersection, where people really wanted a crosswalk. It was just little things like that that usually
Gretchen Faliszek: People want it really
Chloe Thurston: And so did you did you actually vote then in it since you didn't have to be a game.
Gretchen Faliszek: Yes. Yeah, I voted.
Chloe Thurston: Okay, so how did you decide what to rank.
Gretchen Faliszek: Um,
Gretchen Faliszek: I was like, I think so. Part of it was from my parents and part of it was also just, I was like that 115 year old on Tumblr, who took everything super seriously and was very into politics so I
Gretchen Faliszek: Already knew about like some stuff from that. And it was also just kind of like because a lot of it. I mean, it's like you're not going to cause harm to someone because you vote for
Gretchen Faliszek: An intersection crosswalk here instead of the street lights turning on this intersection so much there wasn't like a ton of stuff at stake, per se. So it was mainly just like what did I actually think was going to be beneficial.
Chloe Thurston: Okay, so I think you might even be, you know, the exception and the sort of
Chloe Thurston: Kind of researching or thinking really thinking deeply about the different choices at the same time as you mentioned, you also
Chloe Thurston: You know, were influenced by what your parents.
Chloe Thurston: You know wanted and believed in as well, which was we talked about last week, which relates to these sorts of shortcuts cognitive shortcuts that voters take to overcome some of these informational barriers. And so what do we call these heuristics.
Chloe Thurston: You know what was, what were you socialized into, you know what, what sorts of family or neighborhood context or educational context.
Chloe Thurston: You know shape your views and your values about things and other way that people take shortcuts is in seeking out trusted
Chloe Thurston: Trusted voices. Right. So it's sort of elite leadership. If there's someone who you consider a sort of an expert on some issue. And you also sort of think of them as being sort of
Chloe Thurston: Roughly sharing your values or being on, you know, in agreement with you. Most of the time you might sort of take their expert advice or concerns more seriously than than others. So I wanted to talk about today is the media. Right. And so one
Chloe Thurston: One view and I pre previous last week of these sort of difficulties in sort of
Chloe Thurston: Helping you know that citizens have in understanding the scope of what it is they are supposed to decide on in politics and also just, you know, becoming informed about the specifics
Chloe Thurston: Is that the media and other intermediaries like political parties or interest groups can help to address this knowledge gaps, they can provide representation in certain ways.
Chloe Thurston: But the other thing that I want to talk about. Hold on.
Chloe Thurston: Let's just fix that. Okay. So as I mentioned, so the mass media might actually, you know, be one of these solutions to the informational gaps that and cognitive limitations of voters.
Chloe Thurston: But there are also some challenges. And so I wanted to just begin to sort of frame this discussion today with some recent trends in the media.
Chloe Thurston: In certain ways is kind of similar to other trends that I've shown you that, you know, trust in general and a lot of different institutions as it's getting lower.
Chloe Thurston: Over time, and you can kind of see that with this media. This is from Gallup and you can see that it sort of, you know, it was at a high I guess about 55%
Chloe Thurston: Roughly 20 years ago and sort of public trust in the mass media has declined a fair amount since then. So anyone have any clues or guesses as to why it increased after 2016
Owen Elton (he/him): Oh, um, my guess would be on like the side of like democrats that a lot of the stuff around like
Owen Elton (he/him): Hillary Clinton's emails kind of died down and I know that there was a lot of people on the Democratic side very angry about how much time the media spent on that for they're really not to be end up being a big story.
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, so, um, so not necessarily just the Hillary Clinton email story, but I think that what you've tapped into. Oh, and as a sort of
Chloe Thurston: Broader partisan dimension of this and much of that change in
Chloe Thurston: Trust in mass media is driven by Democrats deciding that they sort of, you know, trust and believe in the media, much more than they did previously. And you can see this humongous get change right from 51%
Chloe Thurston: Which might be shaped in part by, you know, they're like fixation on on emails versus the the election of Trump afterwards.
Chloe Thurston: To 72% which is, you know, that's a really, really big change, and at the same time, you know, this is mostly a
Chloe Thurston: This is a partisan change. If you look at the trust in mass media among Republicans, you know, it's still quite low in it it declined.
Chloe Thurston: You know, between 2015 and 2016 and bumped up a little bit. You know, it's mostly been quite low. So
Chloe Thurston: Anyhow, like I said I wanted to just frame our discussion today with some of these, you know, bigger questions about, well, how to
Chloe Thurston: How to improve democracy, you know how to improve some of the cognitive limitations that voters bring to their political decision making. Because again, voters are sort of at the heart of American representative democracy.
Chloe Thurston: And you know what role can the media play. And one of the big challenges here though is, and I think it's important to think about, you know, as we're talking about this is
Chloe Thurston: That trust in the media is bifurcated and it's not necessarily guaranteed and that can provide post other challenges, but just to give you a quick overview of what we're going to talk about today.
Chloe Thurston: First, I'm going to talk about the multiple roles that the news media supposed to play in a mask democracy.
Chloe Thurston: Then I want to step back and examine the development of the news media from the colonial period till today. Hopefully we can do that.
Chloe Thurston: It's going to be really fast. And then after talking a bit about how media has changed. I want to spend a moment looking at a few recent changes in the industry.
Chloe Thurston: For example, the decline of print news and the rise of internet sources including social media and the shift from mass media to niche cable news as well.
Chloe Thurston: Then I'm going to talk about sort of political scientists efforts to figure out what effect. Modern news media has on the public as well as on the third on the policy agenda again, thinking about
Chloe Thurston: The sort of role of political partisanship and trust so mass media in democracy.
Chloe Thurston: So we can think about the news media as playing three essential roles in a mask democracy. And so the first is informing the public about politics and government right this is very basic, but you know what is happening right now.
Chloe Thurston: election outcome information and information about votes information about different types of political events sort of discussions that might be about to policy discussions that might be up for debate and legislators, etc. The second
Chloe Thurston: Okay, is that some news media plays a role as an intermediary institution and by intermediary. I mean sort of an institution that helps to provide a link between citizens and the government
Chloe Thurston: The media allows political elites to learn about what the public is thinking and vice versa, and before the rise of opinion bullying in fact presidential staff.
Chloe Thurston: Staff members would actually read local press coverage to determine how the public health about their policies, because again, they didn't have the ability to go survey, you know, thousands or, you know, maybe not thousands but hundreds
Chloe Thurston: Of local citizens to figure out how they felt so good. Go look at papers instead. So it sort of had this this you know multi directional relationship between citizens and government
Chloe Thurston: And then finally, there we go. The media also apps and services a watchdog over the government telling people where things are going wrong.
Chloe Thurston: And there are many examples of this, but I thought I would provide one local example of media as watchdog. Okay, so this is the mirage tavern. This is around 1977
Chloe Thurston: And this is in Chicago 731 North wells street. I don't know if any of you guys are from your there.
Chloe Thurston: And yeah, so this is just your typical sort of dive bar on the north side of Chicago, except for a few things about it that are of note.
Chloe Thurston: So this was actually purchased by the Chicago Sun Times in 1977 to run a very elaborate state. And so they had all of these pretend bartenders who were actually reporters and investigators
Chloe Thurston: The repairman was actually a news photographer, they had a hole in the ceiling for cameras and then they also position the bar stools.
Chloe Thurston: In the bar just right so that it would be possible for the reporters to collect to catch city inspectors accepting bribes in exchange for ignoring health and safety violations and city.
Chloe Thurston: So they use this against an elaborate sting to catch these health and safety inspectors, the city, you know, city workers.
Chloe Thurston: Engaged in a variety of corrupt behavior. And so they do this, they you know by and pretend to have a bar.
Chloe Thurston: And then it's published in a 25 part series all of their findings and this ultimately leads to about a third of the city's electrical inspectors getting indicted and major reforms and city and state coats. Oh, so
Chloe Thurston: Question for you guys, you know, is this okay like that, that the the media that, you know, a newspaper, get this, what do you think
Chloe Thurston: Wait.
And then, Andrew.
Lee Ajisafe: I'm of two minds the subject. On one hand, this is extraordinarily creepy and invasive and if we're done to me personally, I would
Lee Ajisafe: Seek all the retribution. I personally could, but on the other hand, it was like, and I guess objective. Good thing that all these corrupt officials were found out. So I don't really know what to think about the issue.
Chloe Thurston: Okay, Andrew, what about you.
Andrew Neville: I'm sort of similar to there with late because like obviously they did it for a good like quote unquote calls but there seems to be a lot wrong with like the process behind it.
Andrew Neville: It just seems like such an elaborate like process to go through like for something. I feel like it wouldn't happen today because today there are probably easier ways to catch them.
Andrew Neville: Than having to go through that entire team like you guys have someone on a cell phone like sitting back and like, filming them.
Andrew Neville: So stealthily. I'm very much easier than having to buy a bar and set up everything.
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, that's right. So there might there might be easier ways to do this. I'm not even sure you could do this without getting found out
Chloe Thurston: These days, I'm just not sure
Chloe Thurston: I mean, I guess one question is, you know, could this be warranted in some cases for the public interest, Vanessa. You had your hand up. You want to say something.
Vanessa Kjeldsen: Yeah, I think that like as you said journalists are like watchdogs of democracy. Right. And I think that there is like some
Vanessa Kjeldsen: Right and need it to expose people of power. I think if they were just doing this to regular people to like out there like
Vanessa Kjeldsen: Local neighbor that's getting paid under the table for tutoring, the kid next door, and that would be really extreme and problematic. But in this case, these are elected officials and I feel like
Vanessa Kjeldsen: The fact that they obviously knew something was going on, otherwise they wouldn't have invested that many resources into exposing it
Vanessa Kjeldsen: And I think it is allowed, because it is a public space and it's like their property. They own it, so they wouldn't be allowed to
Vanessa Kjeldsen: Film. They don't need consent. Just like if you go into your local grocery store, they can film you without your consent, because
Vanessa Kjeldsen: You're accepting the terms onto their property. I just saw that in the chat. But I think yes, this was like wild and crazy, but I also think that like, in the end, the fact that a third
Vanessa Kjeldsen: Of the city council was indicted lets you know that like this was necessary change. And if they hadn't had taking this action and knew about it and let it continue like aren't they just bystanders to injustice.
Chloe Thurston: And Vanessa. Are you have adult students
Yeah.
Chloe Thurston: Yes. No.
Chloe Thurston: No. So that's a great, that's a great answer, so I'm not gonna, I don't know if I have time to take everyone else's
Chloe Thurston: Comments, but you want to add them to the group chat and we can sort of continue this on there but you know
Chloe Thurston: That's a really important question, you know, is this okay and what extent is it okay. When do you sort of way these like giant privacy and consent issues and sort of entrapment issues against the public interest.
Chloe Thurston: When I think, you know, Vanessa has a really good point. So, you know, other you know someone is acting illegally when they're paying you know a tutor under the table to but you know if there's something that seems
Chloe Thurston: unseemly about, you know, engaging in something like that to catch them in the act of breaking the law versus public officials doing the same. And so to give you a sense of, you know what, what did end up happening.
Chloe Thurston: Wasn't, you know, this, this, again, this was really a big deal. A third of the electrical inspectors, you know, were invited
Chloe Thurston: Steal and it made national is just a, you know, it was a very prominent story. At the time, there was discussion of it, maybe winning the Pulitzer
Chloe Thurston: And the this is, I think, where the question of, you know, whether this is okay or not.
Chloe Thurston: Comes up is that, in the end, but then Bradley, who at the time was the executive editor of The Washington Post successfully argued against the stories winning LUCKY, WHAT surprise.
Chloe Thurston: Because of the specific undercover tactics used to expose the correction and His argument was that
Chloe Thurston: Running the bar created a conflict of interest for the journals, journalists and also betrayed their credibility.
Chloe Thurston: But again, there's a big question about, you know, whether sometimes. And when this might be warranted for for the public interest if
Chloe Thurston: If Vanessa turns out to be running, you know, like a student center, a student bar. I am not going. I wouldn't recommend any of you guys go because it's a steak. Pretty sure
Chloe Thurston: But anyhow,
Chloe Thurston: You can think about sort of other you know this is a really extreme example.
Chloe Thurston: But this the sort of the watchdog role of the media is also, you know, an important role in one that we can see many recent examples of, you know, I think the most recent one is the New York Times publishing
Chloe Thurston: Information from President Trump's tax returns, right, and at what sounds like sort of a pretty big risk to whoever provided those those returns. So
Chloe Thurston: Anyhow, whoops. There we go. Um, so again, you know, three sort of main roles and just one quick thing to know is that the First Amendment freedom of the press.
Chloe Thurston: Is, you know, a safeguard or at least tries to be a safeguard of these roles. And when we think about the sort of way that this works. The doctrine of prior restraint.
Chloe Thurston: Means that is the doctrine that the government is not supposed to prevent news from being published and that sort of the, the principle that allows the media to to move forward with stories that might even be, you know, challenging
Chloe Thurston: Or have some of these other sorts of issues that come up. So, you know, in addition to though to playing these important roles in the democracy and democracy. There's also a secondary role of the media that is sort of
Chloe Thurston: Relates to the development since the beginning, you know, since the colonial period. Um, and that is that the media is a private
Chloe Thurston: Enterprise, right. So, you know, if you think about, you know, political actors as rational actors and this is related to, you know, the sort of theme of this principle of, like, you know, political behavior being strategic
Chloe Thurston: Elected officials are defined by elections and they're sort of, you know, want to win reelection or Dwayne election, the first time.
Chloe Thurston: We can think about the media also is having an incentive by the fact that it's private enterprise as well.
Chloe Thurston: And what do I mean by that. Well, it's costly to produce news and the costs have changed over time, but the costs, still, you know, are concerned.
Chloe Thurston: And there's also lots of competition for audiences, as well as for advertising, which helps to offset the costs to produce news and it's fierce right
Chloe Thurston: We can also think now about sort of the, the rise of the proliferation of outlets, especially with the rise of digital media and the low entry costs. And this means that the underlying profit motive.
Chloe Thurston: Means that these outlets might be compelled to present the news and ways that sells newspapers, magazines or gets people to watch or listen to particular program or attract people to a particular website.
Chloe Thurston: And so why does this matter because it can affect the types of stories that are covered. Having a narrative hook for example involving a conflict or a scandal and might be more exciting than covering local town budgeting process.
Chloe Thurston: And for example, you know, just to think about this in the real world, you know, fewer few newspapers American newspapers, at least devote as many resources to international news coverage is to things like sports.
Chloe Thurston: Fashions celebrity gossip or food. And generally what gets covered is a function of what will sell and what people want to read
Chloe Thurston: So,
Chloe Thurston: Again, so this sort of you know this affects the types of stories that are covered the allocation of resources from personnel.
Chloe Thurston: Groups to stories. And do you think this is sort of good or bad. What is sort of the good of having a competitive, you know, private enterprise media. I'm gonna. Let's see, invite someone who hasn't spoken yet I'm Hank and then Sam.
Hank Yang: I think when it's competitive.
Hank Yang: That
Hank Yang: Like, it might be good because it like really delves into either side.
Hank Yang: And instead of just covering like just a basic news a think that it might go in depth and do investigations or do something that, well, I guess, be better than the competition or
Hank Yang: And yeah, that's I think might be
Chloe Thurston: Yeah okay so your competitions first sort of
Chloe Thurston: Quality I could guess what you're getting it right in depth reporting like that.
Hank Yang: Thank
Hank Yang: Sam Did you want to say something. Yeah.
Sam Keimweiss: I'm mostly agree with Hank. Um, yeah, I think that there's there's definitely a rat, though, that I think was kind of alluded to that if
Sam Keimweiss: It's more profitable to focus on less controversial things, then the job of the media is a watchdog may not be done in a in a productive way because the resources might be allocated elsewhere.
Sam Keimweiss: However, on the
Sam Keimweiss: On the other hand, I mean, the New York Times is one example of someone that when they, when they do release their watchdog articles for their investigative articles, it generally helps them from a profit standpoint.
Sam Keimweiss: Yeah. So in that sense, I think there is there is a certain profit benefit or new source for mass media to cover to cover scandals and to be be a watchdog. So I think there's some benefit there as well.
Chloe Thurston: Okay, I'm Anna about you.
Anna Lansford: I was gonna say something kind of similar to what Hank said about if there is
Anna Lansford: Kind of competition than that in a way rewards like the integrity of good journalism in the stories that are well thought out and well like researched.
Anna Lansford: Might get more readership than some that are kind of more click baby. So I think that in a way it kind of helps journalists to like be motivated to find a really good story and a story that will appeal to like a wider range of audience than just like the base of their news organization.
Chloe Thurston: Mm hmm.
Chloe Thurston: Emma, I saw your hand up three times. So I think you want to say something.
Emma Rosenbaum: Sorry. Is it like difficulties there. But, um, one thing that I think like is bad about like being a prophecy enterprise is that
Emma Rosenbaum: One of the first desks to get cut is the investigation desk and that kind of on can be problematic and
Emma Rosenbaum: Make the newspaper less likely to be a watchdog and just because like those desktop because it takes a while to turn out those stories and it's not as instant. And so I think that can be problematic.
Chloe Thurston: Get that's a great point. So, you know, in
Chloe Thurston: Quality investigations are really expensive. They require
Chloe Thurston: Lots of resources, lots of time, they might not work out, do so, you know, you could think of there being, you know, a
Chloe Thurston: Challenge here where you know there might be an incentive to sort of go for the low hanging fruit that sort of a sure thing than the more expensive.
Chloe Thurston: Slower slower kind of product. Again, you know, I invite people to continue this in the chat if they would like to
Chloe Thurston: But thanks. This is great. This is a fun discussion. I always like teaching this class, this particular lecture because
Chloe Thurston: Generally, a lot of middle students take the intro American class, too. So it's just interesting to always hear about different perspectives. But yeah, so you know, I think what you what you guys got got at here though.
Chloe Thurston: And Harrison, I think that we'll talk about this a little bit more to about sort of what the different types of coverage, a little bit later on today.
Chloe Thurston: Are sort of, you know, the goodness of competition among the outlets consumer coverage and efforts to, you know, uncover scoops, and that could arguably lead to a better product and there are certainly examples of, you know, high quality.
Chloe Thurston: Journalism and scripts and investigative journalism. I think some of these examples came up in our discussion. So, you know,
Chloe Thurston: But at the same time. There's also this tension. And I think that several of you pointed to this to between the goal of winning a wide audience. And the goal of informing the public and, you know, playing with watchdog role.
Chloe Thurston: Because the former depends on what sells and then one final caveat before it sounds like this is just, you know, horribly cynical.
Chloe Thurston: Is that, you know, characterizing the news media as a business shouldn't described it, their integrity as supplier as a vital information. If anything, the influence profit digging is in some respects highly democratic right since the introduction of mass circulation and advertising.
Chloe Thurston: The news media has been in continual competition to increase audiences for their product.
Chloe Thurston: And national broadcast networks newspaper canes public have TV, radio programs 24 hour news shows blogs Twitter all reflects sort of this entrepreneurial tradition of the press that yes has, you know, attention with
Chloe Thurston: You know, that sort of types of news that are necessary for democracy to function and sort of the, the need to also draw in an audience.
Chloe Thurston: Oh, thanks. Thanks, and Elisa for this. So, um, yeah. So I want to say a little bit about the
Chloe Thurston: Historical development. Try not to go too long on this, but I think that the historical development of the news media also sort of speaks to this sort of role of, you know, these, these roles of the news. In a democracy, but also this sort of these
Chloe Thurston: private enterprise competitive profit considerations and cost considerations.
Chloe Thurston: The historical development is kind of like today persistently sort of tied to concerns about cost technology audiences, etc.
Chloe Thurston: In the colonial era, there were few dedicated newspaper publishers, because it was just not profitable enterprise at the time.
Chloe Thurston: Instead, most early newspapers were run by people in related businesses like print shop owners or postmasters,
Chloe Thurston: And they would just enter into the news business because of the marginal printing and delivery costs by the time you know they're already kind of in the business of printing or delivery and
Chloe Thurston: doesn't really cost that much more for them to also go into the news business. It's a viable side project for them.
Chloe Thurston: But it's extremely expensive at the time, in part because of the poor communications and transportation infrastructure and country. It wasn't that unusual for newspapers to feature breaking news that was like two months old.
Chloe Thurston: And transportation was expensive, but even more expensive than that was the printing process every page had to be composed in reverse from individual pieces of metal tight and we're talking about wooden hand cranked presses, much like the one here this
Chloe Thurston: And so the historian Charles Clark sort of describes what this process was like, and he says he characterizes as
Chloe Thurston: physically demanding work repetitive and often dreary usually carried on uninviting foul smelling you're in was a preferred substance for soaking the leather covers of Inkling balls.
Chloe Thurston: And poorly lighted surroundings. And so you can see that this is, you know, this is a very difficult process. And again, it's sort of, it's, it's a side project because it's so expensive on its own and not you know commercially viable on its own. Okay, so
Chloe Thurston: Here we go. So around sort of 1783 to the end of the Civil War, we characterize as the error of the party press and so publishing the news in this period was still expensive and it still wasn't very profitable.
Chloe Thurston: But this time parties had a new idea about sort of and this is what the rise of political parties and we'll talk about this more in a few days.
Chloe Thurston: Or I guess next week, but two parties had a new idea okay if newspapers are expensive to produce. Then why not subsidize the operations of newspapers ourselves as parties.
Chloe Thurston: So they would get editors or journalists to cover the news in a way that benefit of the parties, candidates.
Chloe Thurston: And issues that the parties cared about and sort of their positions on those issues in exchange for government printing contact tracks. If you know when, if and when the party wins and takes office.
Chloe Thurston: Or for government job. So, for example, Andrew Jackson is believed to have given about 40 jobs to federal to reporters after becoming president
Chloe Thurston: And then so what this means, at this point is that PR papers are primarily a tool for parties to get their message out. Right.
Chloe Thurston: They rarely even pretended to do objective reporting the time they gave one sided versions of the news.
Chloe Thurston: Or you know just didn't report stories that would flatter their opposition. So for example, when democrat Grover Cleveland won the presidency in 1880 for the LA Times, which was a Republican paper.
Chloe Thurston: Just didn't report the outcome for a few days because it's just not great for them. Right. But still there's a huge growth and outlets.
Chloe Thurston: The newly independent us you know right when, after the revolution had about 35 newspapers by 1833 had grown to 1200
Chloe Thurston: So, um, so what are some of the strengths of the party press. I guess I'm going to say this rhetorically
Chloe Thurston: Um, um, so, for one thing, you do know the biases ahead of time, right, there's no there's there's no guessing you know about sort of what direction.
Chloe Thurston: Newspaper is biased for in this era. And another thing is that the papers can also watch each other and respond to each other's stories.
Chloe Thurston: And it was also very useful for mobilizing people and mobilizing others, and it did this by presenting news in a way that rally THE PARTY FAITHFUL
Chloe Thurston: And so this was also part of a very hot, an atmosphere in the United States have very high political participation.
Chloe Thurston: Voter turnout and reached record bubbles in the mid 1800s 1856, for example, over 80% of voters turned out in the Northeast for the United States.
Chloe Thurston: At the same time, with the party press you can't, you know, big problem is you can't exactly trust the paper to be accurate and basic facts right and so
Chloe Thurston: The party press has along decline. It sort of ticket typically thought of as over by the end of the Civil War.
Chloe Thurston: But it was aided it's sort of its decline was aided by the rise of cheaper printing technology, starting in the 1830s 1940s and this facilitated the rise of what we called the penny press
Chloe Thurston: Newspapers like New York Sun and your journal and they still weren't trying to be objective, they were going straight for sensationalism and so an example of this would be
Chloe Thurston: That the media is arguably responsible for pulling in reluctant William McKinley into the Spanish American War in 1898
Chloe Thurston: And so what happened was both of these New York papers widely reported that a US ship had been blown up by a paedo in reality was probably an accident, but it was like, you know, really it. So, you know, it got people really excited. And so that's why they reported on it.
Chloe Thurston: So one of the things, though, that the penny press is advanced did was changed or the politics of media the penny press coverage of topics.
Chloe Thurston: To attract a broader audience led them to also reduce the amount of space devoted to party politics.
Chloe Thurston: And at the same time editors began to view their policy their partisan affiliations to help them appeal to a broader audience, they started to see that maybe it would actually sell if they were less political
Chloe Thurston: You know, they could widen their, their widen expand the readership. And so they became sort of less overtly partisan
Chloe Thurston: Advertisers at the time also sort of a huge concern and a growing concern with the rise of mass consumer market. So I'm going to think about the rise of the railroads department stores mail order catalogs.
Chloe Thurston: Advertisers also wanted a broader audience over and narrowly partisan one. And so over time these these considerations and others.
Chloe Thurston: Lead to the rise of what we call the objective, press the development of this idea of journalistic objectivity and I'll get into a few other reasons for this to in a second.
Chloe Thurston: And so I only put this in quotes because I when I think about when I want to talk about the objective press. I want to think about this also in sort of a change fundamental change in the way that journalists.
Chloe Thurston: Started to think of themselves and the press started to think of itself as being, you know, motivated by
Chloe Thurston: The sort of pursuit of objectivity. I'm not saying that because of like fake news or anything, but just as like a self a change in sort of how the profession.
Chloe Thurston: Field itself and sort of the rise in the idea of sort of, you know, wanting to be a professional journalist and so the attempted objectivity reflected a complex history of postwar anxieties.
Chloe Thurston: Post World War One anxieties in particular about the use of newspapers as tools newspapers were part of the world war one sort of propaganda effort and became sort of self reflective about their role in that. After World War One.
Chloe Thurston: I guess more topically some newspapers, sort of in during the Spanish flu and 1918 failed decided not to report on it because local governments didn't want it reported on because they were worried that sort of scoop local populations.
Chloe Thurston: But so
Chloe Thurston: So there is the profession starts to reflect on sort of some of the ways that it's maybe been used
Chloe Thurston: That that newspapers have been used as political tools by by policymakers and parties in the past and journalists and editors began to frame their profession in general and news products in particular is objective.
Chloe Thurston: In order to build their credibility and this commitment towards neutrality is canonized through
Chloe Thurston: The growing ranks of journalism schools. This is when you start to see the sort of the creation and proliferation of schools of journalism.
Chloe Thurston: professional associations and awards, like the Pulitzer Prize and actually we see this across, not just journalism, but a whole bunch of other professions to like the legal profession and medical professions, just a time
Chloe Thurston: Of sort of increasing of efforts to sort of increase professional competence and also sort of views of professions.
Chloe Thurston: And so in this process though value neutrality becomes not only the hallmark of high quality news, but also a requirement for ethical reporting.
Chloe Thurston: At the same time, and you can start to see some of the tensions. Again, it's also coincides with another technological change and that's TV right so television becomes more commonplace and US households in the early to mid 1950s.
Chloe Thurston: And so this leads to broadcast news and broadcast news is sort of mindfully of self consciously presented as unbiased from the outset early broadcast television emulated the newsreels
Chloe Thurston: They still relied on advertising. So, for example, NBC had the camel news caravan and that was sponsored by camel cigarettes and so camel cigarettes and
Chloe Thurston: Tried to avoid sort of involvement in news content, but also forbade any mention of cancer. If someone does died of cancer, they would be described on NBC news program as passing away from a long illness.
Chloe Thurston: And so this was actually maybe more dignified than NBC. Other notable initiative. This was the today show with Dave caraway suffering from flagging ratings when it debuted in
Chloe Thurston: introduced a new co host this guy here chimpanzee named Jay Fred months. And so how did this happen again. They had flagging ratings in 1952
Chloe Thurston: A year later, the President of the network some bugs in a coffee shop. And he was like, oh, this guy's press it. This isn't about him and and so offered his owner, a contract.
Chloe Thurston: getaway and months didn't get along very well and it's reported that caraway would spike mugs this orange juice with
Chloe Thurston: With drugs. So he would do a bad job. And it turns out that the chimp through a lot tantrums do. So it was like a tumultuous relationship.
Chloe Thurston: But anyhow, I thought I just as an aside,
Chloe Thurston: Network News emerged as a source of social cohesion and information is more of a morning program here, but sort of evening the evening news became a source of social cohesion.
Chloe Thurston: Of information. It was unprecedented families increasingly tuned in, in the evenings.
Chloe Thurston: They watched the same content at the same time, and it was part of an evening ritual United States that forum to sort of connective common stock of
Chloe Thurston: Political knowledge, again, sort of thinking about the difficulties of gathering your own political knowledge and making sense of it right analyzing it, and figuring out sort of what to think.
Chloe Thurston: And so, CBS and NBC began to expand their operations, they would offer a more reliable reporting, but in a sort of an eye catching and straightforward manner so that viewers didn't have to be particularly sophisticated in order to understand the information
Chloe Thurston: And this sort of effort gained gravitas over, you know, the mid century and particularly when Edward Moreau took on Joseph McCarthy McCarthy at the height of his power.
Chloe Thurston: McCarthy, the anti communist senator from Wisconsin. And so the most critical moment came when Moreau actually interviewed the center and
Chloe Thurston: opened him up to national scrutiny and ultimately contributed to a center. And this was pretty brave for tomorrow and for the network CBS at the time.
Chloe Thurston: So I want to step back for a second, just quickly say something about the regulatory framework. One thing to note that's important to mention
Chloe Thurston: Is that the regulatory framework at in sort of the middle of the 20th century, largely fit the media's self conception of objectivity.
Chloe Thurston: So I want to highlight a few different aspects of it first. So first I wanted to step back and think about the tragedy of comments and how early radio and television could actually maybe reflect some of those challenges.
Chloe Thurston: So during the 1920s hundreds of stations came on the air creating massive congestion problems across the broadcasting spectrum.
Chloe Thurston: Stations overcrowded desirable spots on the radio dial and it caused signal inference and threatened to trample the entire industry because like no one could actually get a good signal.
Chloe Thurston: Broadcasters acting individually could not solve this classic tragedy of the commons problem. And so soon they accepted that airwaves were a public good, instead of private property.
Chloe Thurston: And the solution was to establish a government commission that could license stations to occupy a particular spot and on the bandwidth. And so the Federal Communications the Communications Act of 1933
Chloe Thurston: regulates the airwaves, or it created the FCC, the Federal Communications Commission I'm to work on behalf of the public interest convenience or necessity and sort of the idea was that you know what was best thought to serve the public interest at the time.
Chloe Thurston: This was what was thought to serve interest at the time. This is something that's changed over time as sort of, you know, political forces and social conventions have shifted to so early on.
Chloe Thurston: As I mentioned, the electromagnetic spectrum for broadcasting was conceptualized as a sort of a natural resource.
Chloe Thurston: That belong to the public and China channels were considered a finite commodity. So the SEC worked to see that licenses were distributed and what they saw as sort of the best way to serve the public
Chloe Thurston: This regulation though by the FCC also created a trade off in return for exclusive licenses broadcasters were required to serve the public interest.
Chloe Thurston: Convenience and necessity is the law explicitly prohibited censorship by the government, but it didn't precisely define what it meant to serve the public interest.
Chloe Thurston: There were a few basic guiding principles, though, despite sort of, you know, the lack of a precise definition of what the public interest was that news or that broadcasters were supposed to serve.
Chloe Thurston: And the to to point out where the equal time provision and fairness doctrine.
Chloe Thurston: So the law that created the FCC also instituted equal time rule and this required stations to provide equal access to candidates for office. So that sort of one candidate couldn't be favored over another are sort of, you know, as a throwback to the party. Press.
Chloe Thurston: By 1949 and other FCC policy, known as the fairness doctrine required stations to devote a share of time of airtime to public affairs program and and that they do so in a matter that's considered balanced and equitable
Chloe Thurston: So to point out, or to highlight this many of the news broadcasts on the golden age.
Chloe Thurston: Were a loss leaders for the network, but the regulations, pretty much required them to you know who these big broadcast news shows in exchange for using the airwaves.
Chloe Thurston: By the 1970s, or sorry, the late 1980s FCC had abandoned this idea because they were worrying that was causing stations to shy away from expand examining political issues for fear of violating some regulators idea of fairness and so these were deregulated in the 1980s and 1990s.
Chloe Thurston: Not sure realized that he's still sort of speaking to the time doctrine and these two tweets from 2017 and then most recently.
Chloe Thurston: Is sort of relevant, although not to the sort of mid century media section to 30 of the Communications Decency Act.
Chloe Thurston: Which states that, with some exceptions internet companies are not legally responsible for the content that they hosted if it was published by someone else, which if you've heard sort of recent
Chloe Thurston: debates and discussions about sort of you know how platforms should be accountable for their news coverage or sort of what they're disseminating that's what that's speaking to. So I'm sort of recap, then
Chloe Thurston: This period. I'm still sort of talking about the mid 19th century are in the mid 20th century.
Chloe Thurston: Sees the rise of an objective press as journalism becomes a profession and cheaper printing technology shifts publishers calculations. There's also a decline in party organization. And there's also a huge rise in the importance of TV news as sort of another like binding agent.
Chloe Thurston: For society, but also sort of subscribing to sort of similar notions of objectivity.
Chloe Thurston: And so a lot of people refer to this period between the 1920s, and then I can 16th is the golden age of journalism.
Chloe Thurston: And by the 1960s and 1970s political information was dominated by the three broadcast networks, ABC, NBC and CBS and by the Washington Post, New York Times. So there was this was characterized by really very few
Chloe Thurston: You know, really small number of press news outlets. So this golden age model has pros and cons. Can anyone think of any pro of having sort of everyone watching just one of you know three networks for their news Laila.
Lilah Weisman: Well, everyone's getting the same information. So everyone kind of has a way to communicate about the same issues and like can gain mutual understanding from each other.
Yeah.
Chloe Thurston: That's great. Yeah, so I mean there's maybe more of a shared basis of information right knowledge, Natalie did want to say something.
Natalie Nordenfelt: Yes, or just going off that it's like more consistent and there's, I guess, less room for bias between the different sources are just like discrepancies.
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, so there's more consistency across the to the sources to. Yeah. And there's probably not a huge range variation across them as you point out, oh sorry what's going on. I'm gonna ask one other person, Andrew, did you want to say something.
Andrew Neville: Yeah, I mean I think the major pros like but like I said, the uniformity and information is like if everyone is watching.
Andrew Neville: The same thing, you're not going to have to deal with any of like what has been going on over the past four years of people claiming fake news on the Republican side, and then
Andrew Neville: Also bias coverage from the left against the rights, like you could
Andrew Neville: Like it, it would deal with a lot of the confirmation bias problems that we're seeing today in the media because a lot
Andrew Neville: Of viewers today are not going to those center news sources like CBS News, for example, is relatively center, but a lot of people are going towards this further center fleeing networks such as CNN and Fox. So if you do for the confirmation by
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, so there's, um, there's you you don't really have the ability to silo.
Chloe Thurston: Yourself right into a sort of news outlet that confirms you're sort of existing biases and predilections about politics right there's no
Chloe Thurston: There's no fox news channel. There's no MSNBC.
Chloe Thurston: You're kind of if we're going to watch the news and actually it's the only thing that's on at that hour so it's not even like you have cable where you could go watch a different TV show, like if you want to watch TV at 6pm
Chloe Thurston: You're going to watch one of these news channels on and, you know, whichever you watch some be pretty similar to what other people are watching Zoe. Do you want to say something.
Zoe Golub: Um, yeah, I was just gonna say that with fewer news sources, there's fewer also fewer opportunities to hold each other accountable. So you may not know that there is a bias or effects are not correct. If you can't don't have the opportunity to see variations and new sources.
Chloe Thurston: That's a great point. Yeah, and it gets to the next question I was going to ask.
Chloe Thurston: To answer you know there there's certainly some some benefits, you know, if you think about everyone's watching the same thing at the same time. So sort of socially. People are all exposed to the same news. And again, your only option.
Chloe Thurston: Your, your only other option, besides being exposed to the same news as everyone else. You know, in the country is to just not watch the news at all or not watch TV at that time.
Chloe Thurston: So there's more cohesiveness about what people think about issues and it provides information about important news to low information voters, which as you know is almost every voter
Chloe Thurston: Is a low information voter. So, you know, other white people who otherwise might not pay attention to the news.
Chloe Thurston: Have you know sort of better access to at least you know some degree of news that might be important to them. And so you could argue that that's good for citizenship and democracy.
Chloe Thurston: But so he makes an important point to, there's a lot less accountability right there are fewer sources.
Chloe Thurston: The mass media at this time is very clubby and so it's sort of up to a small handful of elite journalists and networks to coordinate and decide what is the news. You know what's considered newsworthy
Chloe Thurston: And so they had tight and Tommy relationships with politicians to and they didn't want to risk alienating politicians, so there's a situation where some news just doesn't get reported, for example.
Chloe Thurston: JFK know they didn't report on his affairs, even that was sort of well known by the media that he was a philanderer, the other hand, you could say, well, it's that news, maybe not.
Chloe Thurston: The bigger problem, you know, besides sort of this like cone of silence of relying on Washington elites to define the news as it can create an echo chamber, and I think this is again, or what's always getting at.
Chloe Thurston: Where the news ends up being a representation of reality through the lens of what elites in Washington think is important. And so that, and that's kind of what we consider in an echo chamber. And so this model begins to break down in the 1960s and 1970s, for a variety of reasons.
Chloe Thurston: So again, one is this idea. You know the problem of the echo chamber and critical viewpoints that we're not already prominent in DC. We're not being taken seriously by the news media.
Chloe Thurston: And if this starts to create some some issues and you start to see this 1960s, 1970s, for example, with the Civil War Civil War, the Vietnam War.
Chloe Thurston: Journalists relied on party elites and generals to provide information and it left them with this like overwhelmingly positive coverage that they were broadcasting to
Chloe Thurston: To Americans and this failed to give the public a sense of the developing problems with the world. And so eventually. This gives out
Chloe Thurston: Photos came out journalists traveled to Vietnam and it became much more difficult for the press to accept the official viewpoint of the worst progress and Walter Cronkite, who was sort of
Chloe Thurston: Like the godfather of sort of like journalistic objectivity would end all of his shows within that was that that was the way it was or something like that. I remember that was the way it is like this idea that like he is just telling the news as really is.
Chloe Thurston: So, Walter Cronkite, though, Captain objective is forced to call out the government for having unrealistic expectations about the war. So I'm going to just quickly do this.
On February 27 1968 during a CBS news special report. Cronkite did something that changed America's perception of the Vietnam War.
I wrote a three minute closing for the program which seemingly without reluctance. Our stern and uncompromisingly fair news President Dick celeb approved.
Denied back and more familiar surroundings in New York, we'd like to sum up our findings in Vietnam and analysis that must be speculative personal subjective.
Who won who lost and the great tet offensive against the city's i'm not sure the Viet Cong did not win by a knockout, but neither did we then with as much restraint, as I could.
I turned to our own leaders, whose idea of negotiations seem frozen and memories of general MacArthur's encounter with the Japanese aboard the battleship, Missouri.
We'd been too often disappointed by the optimism of the American leaders, both in Vietnam and Washington who have faith any longer in the Silver Linings they find in the darkest clouds.
For it seems now more certain than ever that the bloody experience of Vietnam is to end in a stalemate.
To say that we are closer to victory today is to believe in the face of the evidence, the optimists who have been wrong in the past.
Say that we are mired in stalemate seems the only realistic if on satisfactory conclusion on the off chance the military and political analysts are right.
In the next few months, we must test the enemy's intentions in case this is indeed his last big gas before negotiations, but it is increasingly clear to this report.
That the only rational way out there will be to negotiate, not as Victor's but as an honorable people who lived up to their pledge to defend democracy and did the best they could.
Chloe Thurston: Okay, so, you know, this is so at odds with Pancakes. Pancakes normal news telling style. By the way, he was not known to editorialize purely that's what he's doing. And so
Chloe Thurston: You know, and after cronkite's newscast on Vietnam LBJ President Lyndon Johnson is reported as having told this press secretary, if I've lost Cronkite, I've lost the country.
Chloe Thurston: until a month later Johnson decided not to run for reelection.
Chloe Thurston: And so cronkite's newscast is indicative of a broader shift towards adversarial journalism in the wake of Vietnam.
Chloe Thurston: And I should mention that Watergate is also something that precipitated the shift as well in the sense developed among journalists.
Chloe Thurston: As well as the public that you know we can't really trust these guys anymore, you know, politicians policymakers.
Chloe Thurston: Media sort of worried that maybe policymakers were manipulating them and so responded by becoming more adversarial and a coverage then politicians, especially Nixon top media with to adversarial and so they ended up on the journalists ended up on Nixon's literal enemies list.
Chloe Thurston: So the rise of adversarial ism is one thing that happened as the sort of club era of cozy elite media relations break down.
Chloe Thurston: The other thing that happens again is sort of the TV news is going back to this idea of the news media business, right, is that TV news changes to and it changes its own business model. And so one of the really important changes historically
Chloe Thurston: For this was 60 minutes which changed TV journalism. And so before it rose to popularity in the 1970s. I think some of the anchors from the 1970s are still there today are still going strong.
Chloe Thurston: Network News operations that were lost leaders, as I mentioned, they were sort of there because the FCC is, you know, required the networks in exchange for
Chloe Thurston: For broadcasting band like waves rights, you know, required them provide some sort of public service as well. And so these were last week leaders was prestigious for CBS to have their morose and cronkite's
Chloe Thurston: But they didn't make money for the networks, they give them a reputation for seriousness, which is important, but that was it. And so again,
Chloe Thurston: You know governing lice government licensing regulations largely required this and that's why they did it, but the costs of the news division through this period was subsidized by the rest of the network. So by the sort of more profitable.
Chloe Thurston: Programming that they were also showing at the time.
Chloe Thurston: 60 minutes changed this though, so it came on, right after Sunday pro football games. So it already had sort of an audience that maybe you know was was already there for the game and maybe would keep watching.
Chloe Thurston: And they also make news more entertaining. They made it look like everything else on TV popular TV. It brings you like I said, a cast a familiar characters just like a favorite sitcom.
Chloe Thurston: You got Mike Morley Shaffer, Ed, people really wanted to know them and wanted to see what they were up to. And they made the news more interesting and presented
Chloe Thurston: Also sort of interesting. But maybe less newsworthy material as though it was real news and so
Chloe Thurston: This was sort of both like a change in the way that the news was covered and done and also something that left to to concerns as well amongst sort of
Chloe Thurston: Contemporaries at the time, and also sort of scholars, looking back, because the sort of concerned about being
Chloe Thurston: Seen as boring or dry was what drove coverage, more than necessarily the actual news worthiness of the content.
Chloe Thurston: But just today, it kind of builds a bit on that tradition in the sense of sort of
Chloe Thurston: You know, trying to be entertaining at the same time as maybe trying to inform and cable news in particular.
Chloe Thurston: You know changes this because it means a lot more choices for viewers. Again, you don't have three choices now of what to watch you have sort of, you know, hundreds, maybe
Chloe Thurston: Not hundreds but and it turned out that a large segment of the population, though, you know, again, tuned into the news because it was only thing on TV and then with cable TV.
Chloe Thurston: On different types of programming competing for viewers became more important to add sort of more sensationalism and the news to make it more entertaining.
Chloe Thurston: These changes, however, also put the objective news media and an interesting conundrum.
Chloe Thurston: And that is, you know, how do you make news interesting without giving up the claim to objectivity and I'm going to highlight a few different ways that you know it's happened.
Chloe Thurston: And so one is to increase. One way to increase markets, while keeping some semblance of objectivity is to focus on the mechanics of the race itself.
Chloe Thurston: Rather than weighing in on the substance of policy proposals, you know their strengths or weaknesses which can again sort of lead to charges of being taking taking sides.
Chloe Thurston: You know, instead you sort of talk about you know why candidate might be winning or losing. And so we saw increased focus by media and spin on political strategy or on sort of political players. And you can see this, even in yesterday's news.
Chloe Thurston: It's not a fair characterization of every sort of all news coverage but you know I thought this was a good example. This is an article about
Chloe Thurston: money spent on advertising by the Trump campaign, which is very different than actually this is a this is horse race coverage right here. It's very different than you know dissecting policy proposals between the two candidates and you know in sort of an objective way.
Chloe Thurston: Another is sound bites so media coverage evolved and now devotes much less time to the candidates speeches in 1968 the average clip of a candidate.
Chloe Thurston: Ran interrupted for over 40 seconds. Today, the average put this fall into about nine seconds after which point the pundit or anchor inserts their analysis and then it's often centered on
Chloe Thurston: First base coverage like white candidates winning or losing
Chloe Thurston: So this means that politicians have fewer words to communicate their messages which also means I have to be more careful with language.
Chloe Thurston: And so if we sort of think about the relationship between this and democracy as its practiced it means that slogans talking points.
Chloe Thurston: sort of become more important. So if you have nine seconds, you know, you're going to talk about death panels, not the intricacies of the Affordable Care Act insurance provisions.
Chloe Thurston: We're going to talk about opening versus closing the economy in response to a pandemic and not again about the complex gradations between those different polls.
Chloe Thurston: In some senses. We could say that this might be a positive development, though the sort of the move towards
Chloe Thurston: sound bites and that newscasters you still at politicians ramble on the air for a really long time and that would just be followed by like a few seconds of dead air.
Chloe Thurston: And the Boston Globe's first issue, and he can 72 devoted most of its front page to just transcribing church sermons. So, you know, I would say another some forward movement in having shorter and more picky comments.
Chloe Thurston: But, but, again, it does sort of changed the way that politics is covered and then it also changes the strategy of policymakers and politicians and candidates to because they know that they have to be able to get their message across very quickly, even if it's
Chloe Thurston: Getting rid of her flattening a lot of nuance one other way to sort of do this though is was popularized by the show called Crossfire
Chloe Thurston: I don't expect you guys to know the show.
Chloe Thurston: But this was a CNN show that from the 2000s and every episode would feature one or two.
Chloe Thurston: democratic political strategists are hacks against one or two Republican political strategists or hacks Tucker Carlson was on this for a long time. I think James Carville it was too.
Chloe Thurston: And they sort of like they pretended like it was fostering debate, but it wasn't really because they were just bringing sort of
Chloe Thurston: You know, people who would tow the party wine on either side to fight and and there was no real effort at persuasion. And so you can see sort of more recent or like
Chloe Thurston: Modern modern 20 years ago, but more recent manifestations of that like CNN town hall debates, for example. And so here's a tax debate.
Chloe Thurston: With Bernie Sanders versus Ted Cruz from a few years ago. And yes, these are serious people right
Chloe Thurston: There are elected figures you know they do care about these issues and have real preferences on them.
Chloe Thurston: But is there any real persuasion going on or information or conversion our effort to convert sort of members of the audience or each other to take a different position or to come closer to share a position and probably not you know it's entertainment. So
Chloe Thurston: While more traditional news outlets are vying with competition from cable networks, etc. They're also vying with a few other issues. And so again, as I mentioned several times now.
Chloe Thurston: You know what to do with this change from having low choice I twice media environment. Years ago news choices were limited
Chloe Thurston: And for most people the news consisted of the morning paper and the nightly network programs and everyone again sort of received like the same dose of information, same client.
Chloe Thurston: Americans have much greater latitude today and deciding what kind of news to consume and when. And so, you know, this is for a few reasons, again, I mentioned the rise of cable news.
Chloe Thurston: Also, the rise of the Internet right of blogs first, followed by sort of social media, YouTube, Facebook, Twitter,
Chloe Thurston: These then you can see here, this sort of, you know, where people are getting their news from it's changed a lot.
Chloe Thurston: Next, right. Yeah, so, um. Can anyone think of any challenges that social media or sort of like increasing the rise of social media my posts for wildlife.
Lilah Weisman: Well, this is just from personal experience, but I often see like news circulating on social media that is not very accurate compared to what you would find in
Lilah Weisman: Like more journalism based news and and also like it creates room for really fast, echoing of that through people like spreading really quickly and like, definitely. I've seen it, like it can lead to kind of people getting together on fringe ideas and conspiracy theories
Chloe Thurston: Great. Yeah. So I think you actually hit all of the main challenges. So, you know, one is that it can sort of lead to its own kinds of silos or echo chambers, as we discussed earlier. Another is are these sort of issues of quality and accuracy. Right.
Chloe Thurston: There is not really necessarily a sort of an external check to make sure that the news that's being shared is accurate or of of high quality.
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, no, I guess I'll leave it at that. Um, so this also means, you know, if we think about this competition that the ability of old media outlets to frame issues is changing as well because they have less sort of
Chloe Thurston: Less control or sort of less they're less prominent now there's sort of a much larger set of of outlets.
Chloe Thurston: That
Chloe Thurston: It's kind of hard to say a lot about these because sort of the technology changes so quickly that it's kind of difficult for political scientists to keep up with. And so I remember like my college textbook, which was, I don't know 20 years ago almost
Chloe Thurston: You know there were no blogs, certainly there. There was no social media at the time. And so they talked about like America online chat rings as possibly being a big game changer.
Chloe Thurston: Very different than than now. But a few things that we do know is that it's much harder for media outlets to frame issues or to control the agenda.
Chloe Thurston: If you think about social media campaigns, for example, and this isn't necessarily bad thing right hashtag activism fillings of police brutality on and you know they're
Chloe Thurston: They're transmission on different social media accounts, those can generate new coverage and attention, making these things international issues and really changing history right and so
Chloe Thurston: These are not necessarily issues that would have been taken off in the past. And it's sort of, it's that, you know, social media has allowed regular people to bypass traditional media gatekeepers.
Chloe Thurston: But this also, you know, does speak to the sort of changes and how media operates in public and in democracy.
Chloe Thurston: It also means stories get covered differently, and I think
Chloe Thurston: This was spoken to a bit by Laila in terms of, you know, there are different ways of covering stories. We can even see or, you know, people get access to different types of things there frame differently, perhaps, based on their own political views.
Chloe Thurston: This is the Wall Street Journal for a few years, stopped. I think last year in 2019 had a project called Red feed blue feed where it would let you see how different to sort of partisan media cover different topics. And so this is President Trump right here.
Chloe Thurston: And sort of how liberal sites were covering him and how conservative ones were. And so people are exposed to different types of coverage and different framing.
Chloe Thurston: I'm going to also in some ways, you know, it might make it more difficult for candidates to control their images to the extent that there's always sort of like a camera on them or something that could go viral at anytime unscripted gas.
Chloe Thurston: At the same time, in the media in the past, you know, again, that's sort of a club. Your era, the media was sort of more likely to
Chloe Thurston: To not share sort of embarrassing gaffes of candidates, because it might affect their ability to have
Chloe Thurston: Access later. And it was just sort of part of the norm. And so now there's sort of less of that it's sort of easier for something to go viral, and at the same time candidates are also able, as I'm sure everyone is aware now.
Chloe Thurston: To sort of reach out to bypass the press ENTER directly reach out to their sort of supporters and constituents as well through social media like Twitter and Facebook, etc. So, um,
Chloe Thurston: There we go.
Chloe Thurston: Okay, we got about 10 minutes. So it's just enough time. So as I mentioned, again, sort of flow choice to high choice.
Chloe Thurston: Sort of mass media to like the proliferation of niche media.
Chloe Thurston: You know, means that today you have as many choices as you do watch a flavors at Starbucks Cass Sunstein at Harvard Law School.
Chloe Thurston: Called the shift, two decades ago he was actually, you know, I thought did a very good job predicting this the shift from the daily we that was, you know, a few shared sources to the daily meet where your news sources are sort of perfectly
Chloe Thurston: oriented towards Euro or customized towards you know your own political values what you care about your interest, etc.
Chloe Thurston: And, you know, there was a question and still is about whether it's good or bad, what the implications are for informing the public pessimists lament that this is bad for democracy, it undermines it
Chloe Thurston: Every political side has its own news shows and now Americans disagree about values. They don't even necessarily hear or see the same reality. And again, this is largely by choice because people are able to select in two different news sources and types of news.
Chloe Thurston: The second, sort of, you know, challenge or and this is for you to discuss in sections, but I think it's really interesting in great scholarly treatment of this is the sort of the rise of the outrage industry.
Chloe Thurston: And this is shaped in part and great part by sort of the changes in the this sort of overarching incentives again of the news sort of being a private enterprise that still needs to seek out audiences.
Chloe Thurston: But also sort of partisanship and polarization of the American public, more broadly,
Chloe Thurston: So the argument of outrage industry, just to summarize briefly again is this sort of this outrage based content isn't explained
Chloe Thurston: Fully by political polarization in the United States, instead of sort of structural changes in the media landscape, especially regulatory and logical
Chloe Thurston: And those have rendered this kind of content profitable. That's the argument made by the authors of that rage industry.
Chloe Thurston: And you know spurs imitation and growth and sort of the rise of this this type of coverage. And so I'm going to leave that sort of discussion for
Chloe Thurston: Sections, like I said, I think it's a really cool study that they did and it just raises a lot of questions for democracy and sort of the relationship between technology sort of regulatory and market incentives and democratic sort of deliberation, or I don't know if you'd call it deliberation.
Chloe Thurston: But this also leads to questions about, you know, whether norms of objectivity are eroding in the media. So I want to speak really quickly to just a few other things. This is just sort of the last section.
Chloe Thurston: I'll try to go quickly but not too quickly, but you know the stole all of this leaves the question of influence on the cable in terms of what power does or some might say, Did the media have
Chloe Thurston: On sort of public. And so the first round of research on media effects was disappointing to people.
Chloe Thurston: Because it seemed to suggest the media had minimal effects.
Chloe Thurston: And this came from studies that found that watching news coverage when citizens watch news coverage. It didn't seem to change their opinions on any issues. So, you know, if someone's in favor of defense spending.
Chloe Thurston: Or immigration reform and they see news stories that are maybe tilted in like the different direction than they than their opinion didn't actually change their views and so scholars took that to mean that the media couldn't really move Pope pan and you can see, for example,
Chloe Thurston: In the like there was very negative coverage of Clinton during his
Chloe Thurston: Impeachment scandal and sort of a sex scandal with with an intern Monica Lewinsky and yet it didn't really change people's view of Clinton. In fact, he became slightly more popular.
Chloe Thurston: Over that period. Not that the media didn't have some effect. The name Monica became much less popular as a result of the scandal.
Chloe Thurston: So, so again, you know, initially research didn't find very many effects about that the media was probably not really, you know, changing people's opinions.
Chloe Thurston: Later research, however, has shown that there are media effects, but just more subtle. There's a lot of evidence for example to show that the main effect of the media is agenda setting.
Chloe Thurston: The coverage of an issue does lead the public to see it as a bigger problem than they otherwise would. So just the amount of coverage given to a particular issue can move the public to think that oh gee, this is a real issue or problem that we need to worry about.
Chloe Thurston: And so classic example of this would be crime, the data showed for decades crime rates going down, but the media at same time was presenting it more frequently over the 90s and 2000s. So the public perceived crime is greater problem and actually what's
Chloe Thurston: What's also important, are things that don't make the agenda if something that you care about not being discussed, it's unlikely that political leaders will pay much attention to it. So, for example, there were huge demonstrations in the US against the Iraq War and
Chloe Thurston: But they got very little attention from traditional media outlets.
Chloe Thurston: In contrast, 10 years later demonstrations against government spying caught the media's attention. And so this change this. Put those issues of government privacy.
Chloe Thurston: Violations on to the agenda, you could think today about Black Lives Matters and how the coverage of the George Floyd protests, the sort of most recent wave of protests and Briana killer ones.
Chloe Thurston: Put those issues on to the agenda so that public decided that they were sort of, you know, more important and should be taken up.
Chloe Thurston: There's also evidence that the media Prime's the public on to evaluate candidates or politicians, more or less favorably by virtue of the types of issues that they identify with politicians or parties.
Chloe Thurston: For example, because the Republican Party is typically identified with smaller government stories about government and competence prime the public to see the world through republican nice
Chloe Thurston: Stories about sort of the plight of working for voters tend to prime voters to think working poor people tend to prime voters to think along Democratic party lines.
Chloe Thurston: Priming is a very subtle form of political bias because media outlets don't need to explicitly favor one side or the other. They just run stories on a particular topic which players to the strengths or weaknesses of a party or candidate.
Chloe Thurston: And then candidates become evaluated on the basis of those kinds of issues that are featured in the news.
Chloe Thurston: And so this sort of thing has been shown experimentally where the coverage of stories is manipulated to see if it changes their salience to the public.
Chloe Thurston: Finally, the way that the media frames stories, how they define an issue or how they portray a candidate may also have effects on the public's interpretation of an event for a person
Chloe Thurston: And you can think about the narratives that form about events about people reporters can sometimes form consensus consensus judgments that can filter out to the public.
Chloe Thurston: So, for example, the media first portrayed brock obama as no drama Obama and then as cold. An aloof and that sort of became
Chloe Thurston: The view that was sort of set for a while. Prominent women in politics also sometimes get become the the targets of consensus judgments. Michelle Obama was mainly it was
Chloe Thurston: Portrayed as an angry black woman Sarah Palin as a debts Clinton as an escalator. One thing to know is that the sort of gendered
Chloe Thurston: framing of
Chloe Thurston: Female politicians seems to mostly apply to serve a small set of really, really visible ones. It's not something that's been found to apply sort of across the board all politicians.
Chloe Thurston: But again, these sorts of these can affect people's views of different types of issues. And then finally, you know, and more recently.
Chloe Thurston: As sort of questions about polarization and the media. I sort of alluded to a bit on previous slides as well. So some political scientists are finding that voting behavior might be less polarized.
Chloe Thurston: If we still did a lower voice media environment, in part because of the sort of the people that are are self selecting into polarized media are different than
Chloe Thurston: The people who are deciding instead to watch you know the Food Network or or whatever. So I'm going to end on this last sort of set of points.
Chloe Thurston: So first, you know, again, you know, how should we think about democracy in a high choice media environment, which is pretty much the media environment.
Chloe Thurston: As it exists right now. This is just a return to the party. Press. If so, should we just judge it on the same metrics that we judge the party press in the 19th century, where is it something different. If it's different than house different
Chloe Thurston: Also, you know, is this a good thing or bad thing you know to what extent is this good for democracy or bad, and it seems to depend, you know, in terms of, like, who you are.
Chloe Thurston: If you are an intense political news consumer then the proliferation of sources permits deep engagement and you know you benefit from this minute by minute coverage, although perhaps in a sort of obvious way.
Chloe Thurston: For the broader audience, though the jury is out, you know, there are still questions. You know, one do they use all of these new channels, we don't know.
Chloe Thurston: To, you know, is biased coverage of the news contributing to polarization
Chloe Thurston: You know, another issue is that you know as the news sort of becomes more polarized or, you know, they're become more options.
Chloe Thurston: People might just tune out all together and particular, those who aren't very interested in
Chloe Thurston: In political news to begin with and then that brings us right back to where we started. If people are tuning out the news altogether and part, you know, possibly because of the site choice environment.
Chloe Thurston: And changes and sort of, you know, the outrage industry that proliferation of more bias coverage.
Chloe Thurston: Then, are they sort of missing an opportunity to become more informed consumers.
Chloe Thurston: Of political information which sort of goes back again to that sort of basic challenge of mass democracy that people, you know,
Chloe Thurston: Don't have the information they need and face many cognitive challenges to getting it and to analyzing themselves. So we're going to stop there. That actually is the end of the lecture for today and I will see you all on Thursday, right,
Andrew Neville: Thank you.
Elisabeth Betts: Thank you.
Ryan Kim: Thank you.
John Perales: Thank you.
Simi Ayeni: Thank you.
Peter Spoerri: Thank you.